TITLE: Master program in Computational Science  at the University of Oslo
AUTHOR: Why choose this program
DATE: Planned start: Fall 2018



!split
===== Strategic importance =====

The program will educate the next generation of cross-disciplinary
science students with the knowledge, skills, and values needed to pose
and solve current and new scientific, technological and societal
challenges. The program will lay the foundation for cross-disciplinary
educational, research and innovation activities.

It is the first educational program to
comprehensively treat computation as the *triple junction* of
algorithm development and analysis, high performance computing, and
applications to scientific and engineering modeling and data
science. This approach recognizes computation as a new discipline
rather than being decentralized into isolated sub-disciplines. The CS program
will  will enable application-driven computational modeling
while also exposing disciplinary computational scientists to
advanced tools and techniques, which will ignite new
transformational connections in research and education.


FIGURE: [figslides/cs.jpg, width=500 frac=0.6] 


!split
===== Vision for the future: Scientific Computing and Data Science =====

Scientific computing focuses on the development of predictive computer
models of the world around us. As study of physical phenomena through
experimentation has become impossible, impractical and/or expensive,
computational modeling has become the primary tool for
understanding—equal in stature to analysis and experiment. 
The discipline of scientific computing
is the development of new methods that make challenging problems
tractable on modern computing platforms, providing scientists and
engineers with key windows into the world around us.

Data science focuses on the development of tools designed to find
trends within datasets that help scientists who are challenged with
massive amounts of data to assess key relations within those
datasets. These key relations provide hooks that allow scientists to
identify models which, in turn, facilitate making accurate predictions
in complex systems. For example, a key data science goal on the
biological side would be better care for patients (e.g., personalized
medicine). Given a patient’s genetic makeup, the proper data-driven
model would identify the most effective treatment for that patient.


!split
===== Aims of the program =====


A specific aim of this program is to develop the students' ability to pose and
solve problems that combine physical insights with mathematical tools
and computational skills. This provides a unique combination
of applied and theoretical knowledge and skills. These features are invaluable
for the development of multi-disciplinary educational and research programs.
The main focus is not to educate computer
specialists, but to educate students with a solid understanding in basic science
as well as an integrated knowledge on how  to use
essential methods from computational science. This requires an
education that covers both the specific disciplines like physics, biology,
geoscience, mathematics etc with a strong background in computational science.


A significant aspect of this program is the ability to offer new educational
opportunities that are aligned with the needs of a 21st century
workforce. Many companies are seeking
individuals who have knowledge of both a specific discipline and
computational modeling.

We plan to offer first Master of Science degrees in Computational Science
and  our students will be expressly educated in the use of
computing to model and study the world around them. Students in the CS
program will achieve a high degree of proficiency in model
development, critical thinking and analysis.



!split
===== Scientific and educational motivation =====

!bblock Applications of simulation
Numerical simulations of various systems in science are central to our
basic understanding of nature and technlogy.
The increase in computational power,
improved algorithms for solving problems in science as well as access
to high-performance facilities, allow researchers nowadays to study
complicated systems across many length and energy scales. Applications
span from studying quantum physical systems in nanotechnology and the
characteristics of new materials or subamotic physics at its smallest
length scale, to simulating galaxies and the evolution of the universe.
In between, simulations are key to understanding
cancer treatment and how the brain works,
predicting climate changes and this week's weather,
simulating natural disasters, semi-conductor devices,
quantum computers, as well as assessing risk in the insurance and
financial industry. These are just a few topics
already well covered at the University of Oslo and that can be
topics for coming thesis projects as well as research directions.
!eblock

!bblock Job market
A large number of the candidates from the five involved departments
get jobs where numerical simulations are central and essential. The proposed
program will raise the educational quality in this area, because
our candidates need a broader understanding of the possibilities
and limitations of computation-based problem solving.
!eblock

!split
===== Multiscale modeling is a big open research question =====

!bblock
Today's problems, unlike traditional
science and engineering, involve complex systems with many distinct
physical processes. The wide open research topic of this century, both
in industry and at universities, is how to effectively couple
processes across different length and energy scales. Progress will
rely on a multi-disciplinary approach and therefore a need for
a multi-disciplinary educational program.
!eblock

!bblock
The proposed program will foster candidates with the right
multi-disciplinary background and computational thinking for
understanding today's simulation technology and its challenges.
!eblock


